---
layout: post
title:  "Material Girl In A Material World"
date:   2015-08-09
---
“What are you studying in graduate school?” is a common question I’m getting these days. The countdown to my first day at UIUC is dwindling as August 15th approaches, the day I swap the deserts and mountains of southern California for the corn fields of central Illinois. This vast, flat land will be home for the next five years as I work towards my PhD in materials science. “What’s that?” you may ask. That’s what everyone asks, but the questions end there.

I ran into this a lot backpacking through Thailand last month with my good friend Jasper Werby. Jasper and I are both pursuing higher education this fall. He’s headed to medical school two hours north of me in the “windy city” Chicago. Chatting it up with fellow travelers over mango smoothies in Bangkok or Koh Tao hostels, I noticed most of our friends were vastly more inclined to talk medicine than materials. I mean, I’m not totally thick. I get it. Health is inherently more relatable because it drives our survival. Anyone can talk about a sickness they endured, a loved one who didn’t make it, or a knee cap shattered on a ski trip. And doctors are ones that make it all better. A mitral valve surgery for doctors is just a normal day on the job; for us it is no small feat. So I can understand why heart surgery might have more sex appeal than materials science, well at least at first glance. But each time I was asked what I did and then invariably asked to explain it, the conversation would be politely steered toward new and safer waters. No questions, no conversation. Silence, crickets, nada. Is it me? Is it the field? Why is it so hard to explain what materials science is? I’ve decided to kickstart my website by unpacking this very question.  

To defend myself, I never formally studied materials science. I did my undergrad in physics, and I can give a damn good pitch for it. What is physics? Physics is a like pocket watch. The fundamental nature of how everything around us operates is like the delicate gears inside the watch, such small and beautiful things adeptly tracking our position in time. Our goal is to understand how these gears work, but the task is tricky because they are hidden behind the watch face. We’re forced to poke and prod the face in new and clever ways to intuit how the watch really operates. I credit Einstein or Newton for that metaphor. One of those big guys. But an elevator pitch for materials science? It’s an interdisciplinary field formally, a field with an major identity crisis colloquially. At its core materials science is a blend of physics and chemistry, but it seeps into mechanical engineering, fashion, architecture, nanotechnology, cooking, biology, geology… the list goes on and on.

When I started researching for this article my first instinct was to log onto wikipedia and search for “materials science”. I was midway through the article's introduction when it dawned on me that I’m an upcoming materials graduate student who just wikipedia-searched her own field. How embarrassing! Perhaps this post is a personal intervention. “Hi my name is Dot Silverman and I’m a materials scientist who doesn’t know what materials science is.” To remedy the situation I began collecting data on the matter. I asked a bunch of friends in fields spanning geology to biomaterials how they personally define materials science. Their responses can be distilled into three key points.

#### 1) Materials science unifies the small and large scale properties and behaviors of matter.

Everything is made of something. We’ve learned that lesson over and over again throughout the lifetime of modern physics. We once placed the atom on a pedestal, proclaiming it was the smallest indivisible unit of matter, which physicists call “fundamental” matter. That is, until scientists in the late 19th century started poking and prodding the atom. They discovered it had an internal structure composed of even smaller and lighter particles. For example, JJ Thomas came to the stage around 1890 and suggested that atoms contain a fundamental particle 1,000 times smaller than the mass of a single atom. That subatomic particle, the electron, is now one of twenty-four elementary particles explained by our Standard Model of particle physics, a theory that explains what the world is and what holds it all together. Let me emphasize that the Standard Model is still a theory, albeit a good one. It is possible that these fundamental particles aren’t fundamental at all, and they in turn are made of even smaller things!  

Finding the building blocks that construct our universe is fascinating in and of itself, and this pursuit alone dictates the careers of many wonderful scientists. However, 99.999999% of the matter around us, if not more, is not fundamental. To understand our world then is to understand the relationships between more complex matter that make the world squishy, rough, sticky, hard, elastic, or shiny. As Democritus (c 400 BCE) said, “By convention there is color, by convention sweetness, by convention bitterness, but in reality there are atoms and space.” That is why materials science interests itself in the material properties that arise from the ordering of the stuff matter’s made from.

Now I’ve already claimed that I’m not yet formally trained in materials, so I leafed through a free Amazon preview of “Materials Science and Engineering: An Introduction, 8th Edition” to get a better sense of how the field traditionally packages and presents itself. The authors Callister and Rethwisch claim materials are either solids or “advanced materials”, obviously containing various subfields. Of course I am vastly oversimplifying the book, but I will take the liberty to explain how I think matter should be classified. First, all matter has a phase like solid, liquid, gas, or plasma. The physical properties of matter in a certain phase are dictated by the ordering of its atoms and the chemical makeup of those atoms. For example, ceramics, metals, and polymers are all solids, but they are different because the matter within them is both chemically and structurally different. The physical properties of a material can then give rise to behavioral properties like elasticity, rigidity, solubility, and conductivity. Using the same example as before, ceramics and polymers are both solids, but ceramics tend to exhibit extreme anisotropic (directionally-dependent) brittleness while polymers are ductile and pliable.

#### 2) Materials science and engineering go hand-in-hand

“It helps to explain materials science in the context of materials engineering.” Bingo. That’s pure gold from my friend Eric, and he would be the guy to know. Eric and I were both physics students together at Pomona College. He’s now a materials engineer by day, flamenco guitarist by night serenading crowds on the streets of Barcelona. I agree that the two faces of materials, the research and its applications, are inextricably bound, and this can be a stumbling point for a lot of us. Eric straightens out the matter in the following musings over Facebook, “Materials engineering has a particular goal in mind - can we use material X to solve problem Y- whereas materials science is a study of what material X does and how it does it. But the two go hand in hand; a good materials scientist is also engineering-minded. And a materials scientist also faces the technical challenges of creating the new material or experimentally forcing a new type of behavior, which are fundamentally engineering problems. He or she can look at an interesting new behavior and imagine the potential applications of the material.”

You can think about materials science and engineering as two parts in a continuous motion machine, perpetually pushing each other forward. Many of the same old elements we’ve come to take for granted can have wild new behaviors waiting to be discovered, oftentimes by engineering new technologies that affect our daily lives. Take carbon for instance, the poster child of “plain elements gone wild”. Carbon has many allotropes, or different structural modifications of the same element. The plain old carbon in your pencil is the same as the carbon your diamond ring, it’s just a different allotrope. Graphene is a two-dimensional allotrope, essentially a flat sheet of bonded carbon atoms, and it boasts ridiculous material properties: 200 times stronger than steel, thick as a single atom, transparent, hyper-elastic! We may as well mistake graphene for Super Man. Despite its impressive traits, we learn more about graphene every day because engineers like Eric poke it in new and interesting ways.

I enjoyed seeing what stance my other friends, like Eric, took on the matter. Although most of them were careful to recognize the subtle difference between materials science and engineering, I noticed some obvious trends. My friends coming from fashion, architecture, and geology tended to emphasized the making and design of new materials and/or products, while my friends from biochemistry and materials emphasized the intrinsic behavior of matter itself. For example, my friend Madison is a self-taught engineer that works at the intersection of fashion and technology. She’s in the midst of spinning up a company that aims to 3D print circuitry onto fabric. She describes materials science as, “The making of new and synthetic organic materials.” Madison’s perspective is completely inline with her personal focus. Most of her work in materials science has been aimed at achieving desired effects to create a better product, perhaps like improving the conductivity of printed materials or engineering fabric to fall a certain way. It makes perfect sense for an engineer like Madison that materials science is a means to a better end.

#### 3) Materials science is a mishmash of almost every other realm of science

Harken back to my frustrations in Thailand explaining materials science. It is this fact, that materials science is a mishmash of all other scientific fields, that’s responsible for the dull stares I never failed to receive.“Ummmm, and??” the stares silently asked like a impudent teenager, because saying I studied materials was like saying I studied science. All of science. Period. But in fact, that was exactly what I was saying, because materials science is America’s STEM equivalent of a melting pot. I just explained that materials science and engineering are constantly pushing each other forward. Well I lied, because materials engineering encompasses all of engineering. As my friend Anne, a geologist/materials scientist, puts it, “Materials science is so expansive, and with it we have the ability to determine the future of biotechnology, solar energy storage, mechanical properties of metals and ceramics, etc.” Anne’s words ring true in the comments I see from my friends like Madison. Perhaps Madison will create a conductive thermoplastic no one’s ever thought to design before. Of course this could have lasting reproductions for fashion, but maybe that flexible, printable circuitry could be useful for the sails on windsails or sailboats hooked up to the internet of things. Perhaps her material could be embedded in a 3D printed heart as an integrated pacemaker. It goes to show that the material world is a playground for all engineers.

Traditional materials science is not what it used to be. We’re toeing the brink of a radical shift, spurred by its mingling with other disciplines. I sense this because the materials classified as “Advanced Materials” grow every day. But what are advanced materials? To me, they are the materials engineered within a new mindset. They are metamaterials, smart materials, biosensitive materials. They are the materials designed with the mindset of an apple product designer instead of a 1950s IBM engineer. My friend and former architect Jonathan provides an excellent example. In 2014 a group of researchers at Michigan State created a transparent solar panel. To those readers with a background in STEM, you might find this ironic. Isn’t a solar panel supposed to collect light, not let it pass through? Yes, so instead of creating a transparent photovoltaic cell, they used something called a transparent luminescent solar concentrator, or TLSC for short. It’s full of salts that absorb non-visible light in the ultraviolet and infrared spectrums. The configuration of the salt’s excited states causes it to emit light in the infrared, which is guided to the edge of the plastic and converted into electricity by thin strips of conventional solar cells. The result is a completely transparent process, where the cell harvests parts of light we can’t see while letting remaining visible light pass through. For architects, this solar panel is both functional and aesthetically pleasing. As Jonathan says, “Transparent solar panels have the potential to kill two birds with one stone: windows are essential for making buildings anything less than dungeons, and they have an inverse relationship with surface area that’s prime for solar collection- especially when you’re talking about towers.” Transparent light-harvesting plastic, in my mind, exemplifies the elegance and practicality of other advanced materials.

This article has taken me weeks to write, perhaps because I’m on the only vacation I’ll have for the next five years. Within these few weeks I’ve noticed a subtle change in myself. I can confidently define materials science to the guys in my Tuesday night running group because writing clear prose translates into clear thinking. I’ve been forced many times while writing to double back and ask, “This this point at all informative?” or “Am I explaining this example in clear, digestible words?” These questions I’ve asked and answered while writing have, in turn, made me a better oral communicator and I suspect will, in the future, make me a better scientist. They are the questions that force me to be mindful in both prose and action. This thoughtfulness shows in my conversations, and its effect on people is dramatic in their face and body language. These are visual cues that my personal passion has, at least momentarily, become their personal passion. That is what all great teachers in my past have done, and it is my main motivation for starting this website. I am utterly dazzled by our natural world, and I hope to convince you of that via the lens of materials science. If you aren’t totally shocked that there’s a company synthesizing slime from one of the planet’s oldest jawless fish, or if you aren’t stupefied that dandelions make latex to protect themselves, then I haven’t done my job properly. With that, I look forward to learning more about our material world with you. 


Thank you Rachel, Anne, Jonathan, Eric, Madison, and Andy for your help. If I used your name in this article, I avoided your last name for privacy’s sake.

Links to my sources.
http://www.particleadventure.org/standard_model.html
https://www.amazon.com/Materials-Science-Engineering-Introduction-8th-ebook/dp/B00838TH1E#navbar
https://www.nobelprize.org/educational/physics/vacuum/experiment-1.html
http://www.doublejumpelectric.com/about/
http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/history/linnaeus.html
http://www.extremetech.com/extreme/188667-a-fully-transparent-solar-cell-that-could-make-every-window-and-screen-a-power-source
